[Mapzen Turn-by-Turn](https://mapzen.com/projects/valhalla) is a free, open-source routing service that lets you integrate routing and navigation into a web or mobile application. The service works globally, and provides dynamic and customizable routing by driving, walking, or bicycling, with clear directions for maneuvers along the route.

To use the free service, you first need to obtain a developer API key from Mapzen. Sign in at https://mapzen.com/developers to create and manage your API keys. There are limitations on requests, maximum distances, and numbers of locations to prevent individual users from degrading the overall system performance.

When you [request a route](api-reference.md#inputs-of-a-valhalla-route), you are sending and receiving [JSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON), which is a human-readable text format. In the JSON array, you need to specify the [locations](api-reference.md#locations) to visit on the rout, the [costing model](api-reference.md#costing-options) that represents the mode of travel, such as car or bicycle, and your API key. The location coordinates, given in decimal degrees, can come from many input sources, such as a GPS location, a point or a click on a map, a geocoding service such as [Mapzen Search](https://mapzen.com/projects/search), and so on. Costing methods can have several options that can be adjusted to develop the the route path and estimate the time along the path. 

The service [route results](api-reference.md#outputs-of-a-valhalla-route) provide details about the trip, including locations, a summary with basic information about the entire trip, and a list of legs. Each leg has its own summary, a shape, which is an encoded polyline of the route path, and a list of maneuvers. These maneuvers provide written narrative instructions, plus verbal alerts that can be used as audio guidance in navigation apps.

The JSON returned from the route query can be drawn on a map and shown as instructions for maneuvers along the route. Through a [plug-in](https://github.com/valhalla/lrm-valhalla) to the Leaflet JavaScript library, you can [display Mapzen Turn-by-Turn routes](add-routing-to-a-map.md) on web and mobile maps.

Mapzen Turn-by-Turn is powered by the Valhalla routing engine, and is available for both commercial and non-commercial purposes. The [source code](https://github.com/valhalla) is open to view and modify, and contributions are welcomed.
